---
layout: default
title: "Why a blog, why now?"
date: 2025-01-20
---

This is my first time creating a personal website. A friend suggested it nearly a decade ago as something I should do to showcase my work. I've been a hypocrite because I've often encouraged students to do that while not necessarily doing it myself. While I was a graduate student and then at NASA, I published frequently and felt that should be sufficient. 

I don't think it ever really was, mostly because those publications were never really in my voice. One might argue that this isn't either because of how heavily I depend on Grammarly to restructure my sentences to make them more readable (as a side note, Grammarly really wants me to be more confident), but it certainly isn't the stunted version I might have in a confrence or journal publication. More importantly, the difference is that on the website, I can structure it to tell my story instead of the individual projects, which isn't something I appreciated before.

This attaches to what this post is really about, though, which is the blog part, not the portfolio. I actually had the desire to blog and share my thoughts a lot earlier than when I had an interest in a website. I actually attribute my meager growth as a writer to posting fan posts about some of my fledgling data analysis for the Lions. I did that to help scratch that Lions football itch after I moved to California for graduate school. The [Pride of Detroit](https://www.prideofdetroit.com/) Community was a rather supportive community for my writing. They were always positive even when they had trouble understanding my poor writing because they could see the effort I put into the data analysis parts. This encouraged me to write more and actually ended up helping my academic writing quite a bit because dedicated practice is important even if the topic is different. 

That said, I never wrote a blog outside of that. I've wanted to share my thoughts on technical work or books I read. I've even written what would essentially be book reviews to myself and never shared them. The reason was pretty simple: What did I have to say that was unique and insightful? Why would anyone want to listen to me? Publically posting a blog felt like the height of arrogance. This is funny because I thought about writing some blog posts about the very content I was teaching as a lecturer in an Aerospace Department! For some reason to me those things felt different because instead of trying to teach the 15 students in my class by posting publically I was implying I could connect to a much wider audiance. Imposter syndrome knows no logical bounds, I suppose.

So what convinced me now? Well, I was listening to the first episode of the [Pragmatic Engineer's podcast with Simon Wilson](https://newsletter.pragmaticengineer.com/p/ai-tools-for-software-engineers-simon-willison), and I ended up visiting [his blog](https://simonwillison.net/). Which, through a series of clicking around, ended up landing on his ["What to blog about"](https://simonwillison.net/2022/Nov/6/what-to-blog-about/) post. He described the concept of the Today I Learned (TIL) blog and, well, just Writing about your projects. The concept of the first is just sharing what you learned, which might or might not be useful to the reader. I love both of these concepts the first because while it might help someone writing about it, it will certainly solidify your knowledge of the topic, making it worth writing. It's a high upside on the off chance it helps someone and a low downside in that it reinforces your knowledge.

Writing about your projects, though, was essentially what I've done with papers my whole career but haven't been doing for the last few years. I hope this will scratch that itch in the same freeing way that writing my dissertation did. Knowing no one in their right mind would ever read it freed me to write all the details out and share my honest opinions, which was fun. As of this writing, my project descriptions are still not completed, and I probably won't get that grimy with them in the portfolio section, but I think I will start with things I am currently working on with details in the blog section that I can tag in the project pages. 

Is this just arrogant naval gazing? Maybe, but I think it will help me and might be helpful to someone else. There are worse things I could do with my time. 