---
layout: default
title: "The Curse of doing what is needed"
date: 2025-06-10
---

I had a friend who routinely would tell me, **"Never be good at something you don't want to do for a living."** He'd often say it in the context of me doing work that I felt needed to be done when there might have been work that would better align with a long-term desire of mine. It was always ironic because we both always put everything we had on the line whenever we did something. We had just enough overlap to understand each other but not enough to start duplicating our work. If anything, we had a tendency to feed into each other's habit of overwork and feeling responsible for anything we touched.

My friend always told me that, but I never took it seriously because there were so many things that interested me that it seemed like there would always be an overlap between something I was interested in doing and what needed to be done. That feeling of always having a viable path for interest and needs was only reinforced when I began to realize what made me feel fulfilled: having a high learning rate, impacting the results, and making other people's lives better. I defined each of those as

- High learning rate - Learning a lot in a short period.
- Impacting results - Making a tangible contribution to the team's goals.
- Making people's lives better - not necessarily just the ultimate goal of the project or work, but more so making the people I work with more productive and reducing their stress by finding ways to help them.

The recipe was straightforward: to be open to new opportunities, take them when they present themselves, learn the domain, the project, and the team, and then deliver. 

I'd be remiss if I didn't mention that the last bullet made me a bit sanctimonious, if (hopefully) mostly in my own head. I would never ask someone to do something I wouldn't and would often take the most tedious part of the job to prevent someone else from having to do it. So when it came time, and people still refused to pitch in and do something that didn't completely align with their desires, at least for a little bit, I was mentally judging them more than appropriate.

I say that because I came to realize there was a particular class of project that opportunities opened for, namely sinking ships or maybe garbage fires. My friends and colleagues used to say that there wasn't a sinking ship I didn't want to captain down or a turd I didn't want to polish. It still worked for me for a while, especially while I was at NASA. At any organization, if you stay there long enough, you start to garner a reputation, and wherever I've been, it's mostly been the same; Nick works hard, and things generally go better when he's around, but nobody really knows what I'm good at. There are just vaguely positive vibes. 

I worked hard, I filled the gaps, and things went better when I was around, so generally, I got recognized. If for no other reason than visibility bias. With recognition came opportunities, though not necessarily of the glamorous type. Then something happened; there was an opportunity I wanted, one I thought I'd be good at. I was told I would have it. Then, after further review, it was determined the project I was currently on was more important. So I did what was needed and stuck on it, providing my suggestion of who should be put in that position instead of figuring that there is always another opportunity.

A few years later, the opportunity hadn't come, I was still doing what was needed, but I wasn't learning. I wasn't progressing. I wasn't happy. I was receiving recognition, positive performance reviews, and promotions. Still, it felt like empty calories, lacking a learning rate, impact, or support. I had another opportunity, this time to move to something very impactful, where people needed help, and in an area I hadn't worked in a while. It wasn't glamorous, but it checked the boxes. Hell, it might even be a direction I want to go. It had the same general odor that I had experienced before, but I needed a change, and it was time for one. I figured in the worst case, I could always find something else.

Now, things started to catch up to me, though. I did what I always did, and things generally seemed better when I was around. On the other hand, I have a few years of nothing to show for missing an opportunity and being a team player. 

In retrospect, if I had pushed for what I wanted and been more selfish at various points, I wouldn't be looking at a banal wall every way I turn with little progress in sight. In some cases, being selfish would have actively caused others issues, but it's evident that by doing what was needed, I was taking the path of least resistance. I was locally greedy, and the gains were marginal. Even if the aggregation of marginal gains were to accrue to something impactful being diffused over many people, it ultimately resulted in little to no actual impact. I might have judged others for not pitching, but they are better off for it, and as far as I can tell, no one else is worse off. It's not a binary choice, of course; there is a balance but I was certainly not balancing it.

Now the positive vibes leave an "everyone likes you," but you don't fit the needs because I haven't spent enough time doing any one thing. What's left doesn't offer much in terms of learning for me, and more often than not, it involves doing work I'm good at, that I'm willing to do but I don't want to do for a living.